# Donna Tartt — Foreword to *The Life of St. Francis* by St. Bonaventure

**Source:** Bonaventure, *The Life of St. Francis* (trans. Ewert Cousins, ed. Emilie Griffin). Series: HarperCollins Spiritual Classics. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco / A Division of HarperCollins, 1st edition, February 1, 2005. **ISBN-10** 0-06-057652-9 / **ISBN-13** 978-0-06-057652-3. **Foreword pp. v–ix (5 pp.).**
**Copyright:** Foreword © 2005 by Donna Tartt. All rights reserved.
**Length:** ~1,100 words.
**Header:** "FOREWORD" (no separate Tartt-given title).
**Signature:** "Donna Tartt" (closing).
**Source PDF:** `assets/sources/archive/LifeStFrancis-HarperCollinsSpiritualClassics-2005-9780060576523-AnnasArchive.pdf`
**Extracted:** 2026-05-14

---

# FOREWORD

From the instant Francis Bernardone first stepped into the arms of the Bishop of Assissi and onto the field of history, he has been beloved by pagan and Christian alike. In fact, of all the saints, he is perhaps the greatest ambassador of the Church—the ideal introduction to Christianity for people of different faiths and cultures. And this is certainly because of Francis's great character and charm, but also because his message is far wider than the institutional Christianity of his day or our own: a faith so radiantly inclusive that it hails the birds as sisters, and addresses a cricket with as much reverence and courtesy as a bishop; a compassionate love that extends not only to all sentient beings, but to flowers and trees and the inanimate elements of heavenly creation: water and fire, sun and moon and stars.

Other saints—even very great ones—go in and out of fashion, or may not be recognized as saints until centuries after death. But Francis's popularity was unique and unprecedented in his own lifetime, and it has continued undiminished from his death in 1226 to the present day. We all know about the love St. Francis had for animals (and they for him) which marks him out distinctively from the times in which he lived, when even human life went cheap. But St. Francis's care for the poor and outcast members of society was also quite radical in the feudal, hierarchical, aristocratic society of Medieval Europe; and his pacifism—hearkening back to Christ himself, and the very earliest teachings of Christianity—was nothing short of revolutionary. Indeed, as G.K. Chesterton remarks, Francis "anticipated all that is most liberal and sympathetic in the modern mood; the love of nature; the love of animals, the sense of social compassion; the sense of the spiritual dangers of prosperity and even of property. All these things that nobody understood before Wordsworth were familiar to St. Francis."

Francis died young, while he was in his forties, and he was canonized only two years after his death, when St. Bonaventure, the author of this life (and a great saint in his own right) was eleven years old. Though Bonaventure probably was not acquainted with Francis personally, he attributes to Francis a miraculous cure from a boyhood illness, which suggests that Bonaventure may have seen Francis as a boy, or heard him speak on one of his preaching tours about Italy. And though Bonaventure relied most heavily on earlier accounts in compiling this life, he also spoke to a number of Francis's surviving contemporaries. The official portrait of St. Francis that subsequently emerges in these pages is not a history or a biography in the modern sense of the word, but neither is it a sentimental rendering of the familiar figure we know from cat tags and garden statuary. Rather, Bonaventure's anecdotes give a sharp sense of the living man himself. Francis is whimsical and affectionate and almost always in a hurry; he is quick to correct himself and assume blame when he thinks he is wrong; he is at once excessively polite and bewilderingly abrupt; he is often very funny; he is generous almost to lunacy. He is also a master of the dramatic gesture, and some of these gestures (such as his extreme aceticism and self-mortification) will be less congenial to modern readers than others. But it is important to remember that Francis—who was by no means an intellectual or an educated man—taught mainly by the example of his life, in an age when Pride—in the feudal aristocracy, in the hubris of the Crusades, in the pomp of the medieval church and the avarice of the growing merchant economy—was the major sin. If his insistence on poverty and humility seems extreme to us (if he was invited to a meal at a fine house, for instance, he would not eat what his hosts provided, but bring along instead a lowly meal he had begged along the way), we must always remember that Francis treated himself so harshly because he was so determined to give all his love and tenderness to creatures who needed it more than he did. There's never anything sour or grim about Francis's aceticism; what continually characterizes it is a warm spirit of open-handed gladness.

Indeed Francis—in his sweetness and strength, in his unswerving compassion for all beings—is very reminiscent of some of the great Buddhist saints and Boddhisatvas, but he is also probably the closest thing we have to a bhakti or a sufi in the Western tradition. He is wholly uninterested in the outer trappings of dogma and ritual; what matters to him is inner devotion, the life of the heart. And people from other religious traditions seem always to have seen this passionate inner holiness and to have recognized in him a friend and kinsman. In Chapter Nine, Bonaventure tells us that Francis, "armed with faith and not weapons," took it upon himself at the height of the Crusades to venture on a peaceful mission into Syria, at a time when the fighting was hot and the Soldan was offering a gold piece to any Muslim who brought in the head of a Christian. But the Soldan was as taken with Francis as just about everyone else was who encountered him seems to have been. Instead of martyring Francis, he invited him to stay for a visit and—far from killing him—attempted to load him down with gifts; when Francis realized that the Soldan would not be converted, they parted amicably and he went back home.

For my part, I first became intrigued by St. Francis of Assissi when I was about fourteen years old, thanks to Zooey Glass's remark to Franny, in *Franny and Zooey*, that St. Francis was more loveable than Jesus. I didn't know anything about St. Francis, but the idea that the hyper-intellectual Glass siblings (whom I adored) found something "loveable" in the Christian faith made me intensely curious, since I—like the Soldan of Syria—was in those days resolutely hostile to Christianity and anything to do with it. Growing up in a part of America stringently dominated by Christian fundamentalism, and not being sympathetic to it by either upbringing or temperament, I had come to believe with all my ninth-grade heart that all Christianity everywhere (ancient, modern, Catholic, protestant) was as suffocating and humorless as the evangelical bullying which was for me a dispiriting fact of life. (Perhaps other children were edified to learn that working mothers were destined for hell fire, or by being forced to wear black yarn tied around a finger signifying that they were "against Christ," but I was not one of them). Consequently, I first came to these stories of Francis's life in a mood of defiance and hard-won suspicion—and, quite to my surprise, found myself captivated by a friendly, delightful spirit, very different from anything I'd ever encountered in Christianity. It was a change of heart both comical and appropriate, because if there's any atmosphere that defines Bonaventure's life, it's this playful element of reversal. Zooey was right: who can resist Francis? Francis who talked to pheasants and rabbits, Francis who invented the Christmas creche? Ecclesiastical opponents, man-eating wolves, enemies and hostile parties of every sort march forward to confront him—and all fall away (bemused, mollified, dumbfounded) before the cloth merchant's son that Chesterton rightly calls the court fool of the King of Paradise.

—Donna Tartt
